Introduction

Optical Character Recognition(OCR) market size is expected to be USD 13.38 billion by 2025 with a year on year growth of 13.7 %. This growth is driven by rapid digitization of business processes using OCR to reduce their labor costs and to save precious man hours. Although OCR has been considered a solved problem there is one key component of it, Handwriting Recognition or Handwritten Text Recognition(HTR) which is still considered a challenging problem statement. The high variance in handwriting styles across people and poor quality of the handwritten text compared to printed text pose significant hurdles in converting it to machine readable text. Nevertheless it's a crucial problem to solve for multiple industries like healthcare, insurance and banking.


Source :- https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Handwriting-recognition-on-form-document-using-and-Darmatasia-Fanany/
Recent advancements in Deep Learning such as the advent of transformer architectures have fast-tracked our progress in cracking handwritten text recognition. Recognizing handwritten text is termed Intelligent Character Recognition(ICR) due to the fact that the algorithms needed to solve ICR need much more intelligence than solving generic OCR.

In this article we will be learning about the task of handwritten text recognition, it's intricacies and how we can solve it using deep learning techniques.

Want to extract data from handwritten forms? Head over to Nanonets and start building form OCR models for free!

Get Started
Challenges in Handwriting Recognition
Huge variability and ambiguity of strokes from person to person
Handwriting style of an individual person also varies time to time and is inconsistent
Poor quality of the source document/image due to degradation over time
Text in printed documents sit in a straight line whereas humans need not write a line of text in a straight line on white paper
Cursive handwriting makes separation and recognition of characters challenging
Text in handwriting can have variable rotation to the right which is in contrast to printed text where all the text sits up straight
Collecting a good labelled dataset to learn is not cheap compared to synthetic data
Use cases
Healthcare and pharmaceuticals
Patient prescription digitization is a major pain point in healthcare/pharmaceutical industry. For example Roche is handling millions of petabytes of medical PDFs daily. Another area where handwritten text detection has key impact is patient enrollment and form digitization. By adding handwriting recognition to their toolkit of services, hospitals/pharmaceuticals can significantly improve user experience

Insurance
A large insurance industry receives more than 20 million documents a day and a delay in processing the claim can impact the company terribly. The claims document can contain various different handwriting styles and pure manual automation of processing claims is going to completely slow down the pipeline
